# Classification language for package monkey

Package Monkey tries to simplify the task of defining a product composition
by letting you group packages (or rather, builds) into what it calls epics
and layers, and letting you compose a product by selecting and deselecting specifc
layers or epics.

## Terminology

### Codebase vs Product

A product is, well, what we deliver to customers as a collection of packages, with a support
contract, possibly with media, and a steady stream of maintenance updates. Think of SLES,
SLES for SAP or the HA Extension.

The codebase is the collection of packages from which a family of products is built, or
_composed_. In the SLE16 family of products, the main body of packages lives in OBS projects like
``SUSE:SLFO:Main`` or ``SUSE:SLFO:1.2``.

### Builds vs RPMs vs Packages

A _build_ is essentially an OBS package built in a specific configuration, such as ``glibc`` or
``bash``. Depending on the build service setup, a build generates a certain number of rpms, usually
on the order of a few. However, some builds can be empty and not generate any (binary) rpms.

In the presence of multi-builds, there may be several builds of a single OBS package;
these are usually tagged with a suffix, separate from the package name by a colon, as in
``gdb:testsuite``. For example, as of this writing, there are the following builds for the
glibc package:

- ``glibc``
- ``glibc:cross-aarch64``
- ``glibc:cross-ppc64le``
- ``glibc:cross-riscv64``
- ``glibc:cross-s390x``
- ``glibc:i686``
- ``glibc:utils``

These are considered separate builds by package monkey, and can be labelled independently.


### Labelling the codebase

When composing one or more products, you do not feed package monkey with a list of individual
rpm names like we used to do with pkglistgen. Instead, composition selects and deselects labels
that we want or do not want the product to include; and certain rules that refine these
selections.

One pretty central paradigm package monkey is to distinguish between the labelling, as a property
of the code base, and the composition, as a property of the product. Phrased differently, we
should try to keep product decisions out of the codebase and its labelling as much as we can,
so that the product composition can be as flexible as it wants and needs to be.


#### Epics

The primary type of label is the _epic_. An epic contains a certain number of builds that
belong together, usually conceptually. For example, we can have an epic called ``CoreCompression``,
intended to contain a set of compression libraries and tools that are somehow essential to
what we ship. Its (simplified) definition may look like this:

```
 CoreCompression:
   description: |
     Provides a set of compression libraries and utilities, including bzip2 and xz.

   builds:
    - gzip
    - bzip2
    - zlib
    - zlib-ng
    - xz
    - zstd
    - brotli
    - lz4
    - lzo
    - libzio
```

Note that any build can be assigned to one epic at most.

#### Layers

In addition, there are _layer_ labels, which provide a grouping for epics. For example, we
can have epics for various aspects of the virtualization stack (like ``Qemu``, ``Libvirt``,
``VirtManager``, etc), which are aggregated in a layer called ``LayerVirtualization``.
While composing the product, you can, vor example, include the entire virtualization stack but
exclude one specific epic like ``Kubevirt``. Or you could limit the layer to a subset of the
available architectures by specifying architecture constraints for it.

There are two primary types of labels that can be used to structure the codebase.

### Handling RPMs

In the world of package monkey, any (binary) RPM must originate from exactly one build. If there are
several builds that produce the same RPM, this is usually considered an error. The code has some heuristics
to deal with such situations, so that it continues to do _something_ in these circumstances, but at
the end of the day, these ambiguities need to be resolved by the release managers.

So, with every RPM being covered by one build, the labelling information can be used to control what
goes into a product and what doesn't. However, including the rpms from a given build is rarely an
all or nothing decision.

#### RPM Classes

The SUSE build conventions require that different aretefacts generated by the build of a package
go into individual rpms. For example, consider the ``audit`` package. It has a base build called
just ``audit`` that provides its libraries, and ``audit:secondary`` that generates RPMs for the
tools, the audit system group, and default rules:

```
Build audit:
  libaudit1
  libauparse0
  audit-devel
  audit-devel-32bit
  libaudit1-32bit
  libauparse0-32bit

Build audit:audit-secondary:
  system-group-audit
  audit
  audit-rules
  audit-audispd-plugins
  python3-audit
```

Obviously, there are some patterns in there. For example, there are _library_ packages, _development_ packages,
some _32bit_ packages, etc. This is why package monkey has the concept of **rpm classes**. The following
table provides a overview of the most important classes currently defined by the model:

|Class          |Description                                |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------|
|user           |``system-user-*`` and ``system-group-*`` packages |
|libraries      |packages containing shared libraries |
|default        |packages for utilities, CLIs etc |
|api            |``*-devel`` packages and the like |
|doc            |documentation packages |
|apidoc         |documentation packages for developers |
|32bit          |packages containing 32bit libraries and tools |
|32bit_api      |32bit ``*-devel`` packages |
|i18n           |``*-lang`` packages |
|man            |packages containing manpages |

These classes can be used to fine-tune which parts of a build make it into a product once the containing
epic is selected. For example, in SLES 16, we exclude any 32bit packages globally. Similarly, we may decide
that we consider certain libraries and their interfaces an implementation detail, and not ship any devel
packages for those. This is what we do for multimedia packages in SLES 16.

Thanks to the packaging conventions, there is a relatively uniform approach to naming rpm subpackages that
help to map rpm names to classes pretty much automatically. However, it is also possible to override the
class assignment per RPM.

#### Build Options

Independent of the class of an RPM, there are sometimes subpackages of a build that do not make sense
in a potential product composition. Consider Gtk, the Gnome Toolkit. The codebase currently contains 3
versions of it. Some packages produce RPMs with bindings for some or all of these versions. When composing
products, we may not want to take all of these.

We can either deal with these by excluding individual rpms from being shipped. But this means that
decisions about the eventual product composition get encoded in the labelling. Or we mark them using what
is called a _build option_.

In the example of Gtk, we define three build options ``gtk2``, ``gtk3`` and ``gtk4``, respectively.
Now, a subpackage of ``libcanberra`` like ``libcanberra-gtk2-module`` obviously makes sense if and only iff
we end up shipping gtk2 as part of a product. So, we mark ``libcanberra-gtk2-module`` as depending on
``gtk2``. In the product composition step, we can then decide whether we want to ship Gtk2 or not. If we
do, we include the epic ``Gtk2`` (containing ``libgtk-2`` etc), and also enable the build option ``gtk2``
which pulls in all the optional packages marked for a Gtk2 environment.

Similar approaches can be used to handle shell completion packages (for ``zsh`` or ``fish``, for instance),
or the various GCC frontends for different programming languages, or the LLVM runtime vs the full LLVM
stack.
