# Package Monkey Overview

## The Pipeline

Package Monkey is organized as a multi-stage pipeline, where each stage of the pipeline can be
run independently of each other. This helps you to tinker with e.g. the codebase labelling, or
the product composition, without having to go through a full run of the tool. Some stages, like
the download stage, may take a few minutes, while the later stages are usually done within seconds,
allowing for a pretty rapid modify/test cycle.

In order to run any of the commands that make up the package monkey set of tools, you need a
model description of the codebase and the products you wish to compose. These are not part of
the package monkey project but exist separately. All the tools currently expect that there is
a working copy of a valid model description in what we will refer to as the **model directory**
in the description below (defaulting to ``../SLFO``).

The model I've been using for SLES 16.0 and now 16.1 is currently available from ``gitea@src.suse.de:okir/SLFO.git``

### Download stage

This stage talks to the OBS service to identify the packages and rpms currently in the codebase.
It will download RPM headers, build information, etc, and cache all of it locally. It also runs
``rpms2solv`` to convert the dependency information of all packages into an internal representation.

Note that the download stage does not care much whether a package is currently building or not.
It will dutifully record the fact that a build is broken, but will then fall back to whatever
rpms are still around from the last successful build.

The available codebases, and the OBS projects associated with them, are defined by files in the
``SLFO`` project, such as ``catalog.yaml`` and ``slfo.yaml``.

### The Prepare stage

This stage processes the dependencies of all rpms and generates an architecture-independent
view of the dependency graph. This internal representation of the codebase serves as the input
to all further steps of the processing pipeline.

In order to deal with ambiguous dependencies and similar issues, it uses a file called ``hints.conf``
from the model directory.

### The Classification stage

This stage operates on the codebase representation of the previous step, and uses the model
definition from the ``SLFO`` directory to attach labelling information to packages.

### The Composition stage

Last but not least, this stage operates on the labelled codebase and uses the composition
definition from the ``SLFO`` directory to generate product definitions, and render them in
various output formats. This includes a ``default.productcompose`` file, equivalent to the
one generated by ``pkglistgen``, but also files containing lifecycle information. 

## Supporting Workflow Tools

In addition to the tools that implement the pipeline, there exists a number of supporting tools
that let you inspect individual packages, or compare the state of your labelling and
composition at different times.
