# Package Monkey Tools

Last but not least, this stage operates on the labelled codebase and uses the composition
definition from the ``SLFO`` directory to generate product definitions, and render them in
various output formats. This includes a ``default.productcompose`` file, equivalent to the
one generated by ``pkglistgen``, but also files containing lifecycle information. 

## The ``monkey`` main command

The main entry point for all Package Monkey tooling is ``monkey``, which supports various
subcommands.

The most important global command line switches of ``monkey`` are

- ``--model-path``: this tells package monkey where to find the definition of the codebase,
	the model, etc. The default is ``../SLFO``. Instead of a command line option, you
	can also use the ``$MONKEY_MODEL_PATH`` environment variable.
- ``--logfile``: specifies the name of a file to log messages to. Given that some parts of
	the tool are deliberately verbose (not to say chatty), it is pretty useful to
	redirect all output to a file for easier grepping.

## The ``download`` command

``monkey download`` performs the download stage described above. The downloaded RPM headers are
stored in ``~/.cache/package_monkey/rpmhdrs`` if you want to look at them.

## The ``prepare`` command

``monkey prepare`` performs the prepare stage, using the information from ``hints.conf`` from
the model directory.

This stage looks at each architecture and each rpm for that architecture in turn, trying to
resolve their dependencies.

If you want to learn more about the internals, and the format of ``hints.conf``, please
consult [this section](prepare.md).

## The ``classify`` command

``monkey classify`` performs the classification of the codebase, using the model definition from 
the model directory. The main entry point for loading the model is ``filter.yaml``, which sources
additional files (in fact, lots of them).

The output is written to a file, which can be queried using a number of useful tools.

If you want to learn more about the internals, and the classification language used in ``filter.yaml``,
consult [this section](classify.md).

## The ``compose`` command

``monkey compose`` performs the actual product composition stage, using a ``compose.yaml`` file from
the model directory. There are separate copies, one for each target release of the product family.

To make a long story short, in the case of ``SLFO``, you will end up using ``sle16.1/compose.yaml`` when
operating on codebase ``slfo``, and you will use ``sle16.0/compose.yaml`` when operating on codebase
``slfo1.2``.

The output of this command is a set of files that get dropped into ``~/.local/package_monkey/sle16.1``.

The most important one is probably ``default.productcompose`` which can be used as input for the
product composer. Note that this requires an input file (``default.productcompose.in``) which is
currently taken from a hard-coded location ``../SLES/000packages``. This will probably change in the near
future.

The command also produces yaml files that can be used by the ``suse-lifecycle`` tool; these are named
``lifecycle-*.yaml``.

For more details on the composition process and the syntax of ``compose.yaml``, please consult the
section [Composition Internals](compose.md).

## The ``buildinfo`` and ``rpminfo`` commands

These commands display information on a single rpm, or all rpms in a build, like this:

```
$ monkey rpminfo fwupd
fwupd (FirmwareUpdate-default)
  summary: Device firmware updater daemon
  architectures: x86_64 s390x ppc64le aarch64
  version: 2.0.17
  lifecycle: stable
  valid scenarios: kernel/default/image
  OBS build: fwupd
  requires:
    - bash-sh (LinuxShell-libraries)
    - glibc (Glibc-runtime)
    - libarchive13 (Archiving-libraries)
    - libblkid1 (CoreRingN-libraries)
    - libcbor0_11 (USBAccess-libraries)
    - libcurl4 (Curl-libraries)
    - libdrm2 (KernelGraphics-libraries)
    - libdrm_amdgpu1 (KernelGraphics-libraries)
    - libfwupd3 (FirmwareUpdate-libraries)
    - libgio-2_0-0 (Glib2Core-libraries)
...
    - fde-tpm-helper (SecureBoot-default) [x86_64]
    - fwupd-efi (FirmwareUpdate-default) [aarch64]
    - grub2-x86_64-efi (Boot-default) [x86_64]
    - kernel/image (KernelPromises-default) [aarch64]
    - libflashrom1 (USBAccess-libraries) [aarch64]
    - shim (SecureBoot-default) [aarch64]
    - udisks2 (SystemStorageServices-default) [aarch64]
    - update-bootloader (KernelPlus-default) [x86_64]
  required by:
    - fwupd-bash-completion (FirmwareUpdate-default)
    - fwupd-devel (FirmwareUpdate-api)
    - fwupd-fish-completion (FirmwareUpdate-default)
    - fwupd-lang (FirmwareUpdate-i18n)
    - libfwupd3 (FirmwareUpdate-libraries)
```

As you can see, this combines information from several sources. First, there is information extracted from the
rpm itself, such as the version number or summary.

Second, there is data like dependency information, which was produced during the prepare stage. Note that
some dependencies are shown with architecture name(s) in block parentheses. These dependencies occur only
on the listed architectures, whereas all other dependencies are uniform across all architectures.

Lastly, there is information applied during the classification stage, such as labels (usually shown in the format
_Epic_-_class_), lifecycle, etc.

The command supports a bunch of command line options that let you tweak the amount of information displayed,
such as ``--requires-only`` or ``--provides-only``. Please consult the help output for an overview.

The ``buildinfo`` command operates very much like ``rpminfo``, except that it takes the name of a build, and
displays each member rpm in turn.

Note that both commands accept shell-style glob patterns as arguments, allowing you to wildcard the names. This
comes very handy when inspecting eg. library packages that encode the soversion in the name.

## The ``epicinfo`` command

This command lets you inspect epics and layer labels, and list the associated builds.

``monkey epicinfo list`` displays layers and epics. When invoked with the name of an epic or layer, it lists
only the specified labels; otherwise, it will list all labels.

``monkey epicinfo show`` provides a more detailed view of an individual layer or epic, like this:

```
$ epicinfo show Gtk2
Gtk2: 4 build(s)
   Life Cycle: stable

   gtk2
      gtk2-branding-upstream; class=noship
      gtk2-data; class=runtime
      gtk2-devel; class=api
      gtk2-immodule-amharic; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-inuktitut; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-multipress; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-thai; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-tigrigna; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-vietnamese; class=libraries
      gtk2-immodule-xim; class=libraries
      gtk2-lang; class=i18n
      gtk2-tools
      libgtk-2_0-0; class=libraries
      typelib-1_0-Gtk-2_0; class=libraries

   gtkglext
      gtkglext-devel; class=api
      gtkglext-doc; class=doc
      libgtkglext-x11-1_0-0; class=libraries

   gtkmm2
      gtkmm2-devel; class=api
      libgtkmm-2_4-1; class=libraries

   libglade2
      libglade-2_0-0; class=libraries
      libglade2-devel; class=api
      libglade2-doc; class=doc

```

## The ``explain`` command

This command can be used to drill into the details of the decision making process of the
composition engine. It can be very helpful to pinpoint any issues when a composition suddenly
behaves unexpectedly.

Take the following example:

```
$ monkey explain gtkmm3-devel
sles_16.1:
  └─> gtkmm3-devel include
      ├─> propagated from build option: gtk3
      │   ├─> propagated from epic: Samba
      │   │   └─> set by policy: epic:Samba
      │   └─> set by policy: buildoption:gtk3
      └─> propagated from epic: Gtk3
          └─> set by policy: epic:Gtk3
...
```

This tells you that the rpm in question is included in SLES 16.1 for several reasons. One, we
explicitly selected the epic ``Gtk3`` to be included.

Second, we selected the build option ``gtk3`` to be included (both explicitly in ``compose.yaml``,
and implicitly by including ``Samba``, which requires it).

## The ``snapshot`` command

In order to understand and keep up with the change happening in your code base, it is very useful
to take regular snapshots of the ongoing work. You can do this on a daily or weekly basis; or even
every couple of minutes while you work on your labelling or composition, to understand how individual
changes in the model affect the output of the toolchain.

If you invoke ``monkey snapshot`` without further arguments, it will generate a snapshot called
``latest`` by copying your _working state_ from ``~/.local/package_monkey`` to a snapshot
directory somewhere below ``~/.cache``. A snapshot includes the output of the ``prepare`` stage
and all further pipeline stages.

By default, the snapshot does not include a copy of the rpm headers downloaded from the build service.
If you want to retain a copy (e.g. for future archeology), invoke the command using `--with-rpms`.

To create snapshots other than `latest`, call the command with the name of the snapshot you wish to create.
If the name exists already, the old snapshot will be replaced.

When using commands like ``packagediff`` and ``productdiff`` described, you can refer to a snapshot
by prefixing its slug with the ``@`` sign, as in ``@latest`` or ``@beta1``. Your current working state
can be referenced using ``@@``.

## The ``packagediff`` command

This command compares two states of a codebase. Invoking it without further arguments compares
the current working state with the snapshot ``@latest``.

The command tries to show you any kind of relevant change that has occurred in the codebase or its
classification between the two states. This includes things like version updates, and added or removed
builds or rpms. It also shows when builds move from one epic to another, or when the class of an rpm
changes.

## The ``productdiff`` command

This command compares two product compositions. Just like ``packagediff``, if you invoke it without
further arguments compares the current working state with the snapshot ``@latest``.

Comparison happens by looking at the ``default.productcompose`` files. It displays, on a per architecture
basis, the rpms that have been added or removed from each product.

You can also use the command to compare the result of package monkey composition with that of ``pkglistgen``.
The following compares the output file of the latter (residing under ``../SLES``) with the one most recently
generated by package monkey:

```
$ monkey cdiff ../SLES/000productcompose/default.productcompose
Inspecting difference ../SLES/000productcompose/default.productcompose -> /home/okir/.local/package_monkey/sle16.1/default.productcompose
   product unknown (generated 2026-02-17 10:31 CET); codebase unknown
   product sle16.1 (generated 2026-02-17 10:27 CET); codebase slfo (build time 2026-02-17 17:23 CET)
Product sles/aarch64 CHANGES:
  removed 1 packages
    SLES_SAP-release
  added 36 packages
    libpmemblk-devel
    libpmemblk1
    libpmemlog-devel
...
```

## The ``publish`` command

This command pushes the current output of the pipeline to a directory from where it can, presumably, be committed
to some git repository. This tool is still at bit of a draft stage, and should be adjusted as we integrate package
monkey more into our workflows.

As an example how it could be used, please look at `src.suse.de:okir/SLES16_wip.git`. You could check out a
copy of this repository, and then copy files to it:

```
$ monkey publish /path/to/my/copy/of/SLES16_wip
```

It is still up to the user to formulate a proper git commit message for the set of changes you pushed, git push
your changes, and create a pull request.

Possible improvements, in case we decide to use the tool:

- check whether the output of the pipeline was produced from a committed model state, or whether there
  were any uncommitted changes. Warn and or error out if the latter is the case (because it makes it
  hard to reconstruct by anyone else)
- pre-formulate a commit message based on changelog entries from the SLFO model

